TO DO

History of Newport market

https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_the-natural-history-of-e_martin-benjamin-optici_1759_1/page/121/mode/2up?q=%22most+unjust+and+infamous%22+%22savage+Practice%22
The natural history of England; or, a description of each particular county, ... Illustrated by a map of each county, ... By Benjamin Martin.  1759: Vol 1
by Martin, Benjamin, Optician

Publication date 1759
p122-4

Upon the Iſland. itſelf, ' beſides many pleaſant Villages and Hamlets, Gentlemen's Seats, &c. there are four or five Towns; three of which, viz. Newport, Yarmouth, and Newtown, the latter of which is much the oldeſt Burrough, ſend each two Members to Parliament. Of theſe, we ſhall only take a little Notice of Newport, the Capital, and a few of the Parts adJacent, — This Town is ſeated on a riſing Ground near the

— . . : — — — * N —

il Centre of the whole Iſland; and to make it the more convenient for commercial Affairs, it has the navigable River Me. dina running cloſe to its Skirts, and emptying itſelf into the | Sea at four or five Miles Diſtance, at the Harbour of Cowes. At this Port there is a Cuſtom-houſe, at which many Caroli-

m and Palatine Ships uſually clear. In this River are takers: Abundance of flat Fiſh, and great Quantities of the fatteſt and beſt flavoured Oyſters in the Kingdom. The Aire of Newport! is: lightſome and pleaſant; and though the Town is ſituatedupon a gentle and agreeable Eminence, yet it is ſo ſheltered: by the Hills which encompaſs: it at about a Mile Diſtance. that the Cold is ſeldom felt to a Degree of Severity common to moſt other Places. The Streets are ſpacious, clean, and conſequently ſweet. Theſe were at firſt evidently laid ut upon a regular Plan, conſiſting chiefly of three long ones, ex-+ _ tending from Eaſt to Weſt, and as many croſſing them at right Angles. They have been lately new piteh'd, at a great Expence; the Foot · way on each Side: being elegantly paved and poſted off, which affords a very handſome Appearance, beſides the: Pleaſure of excellent Walking. The Buildings; tho few of them grand, are neat and handſome, ſo that few Places, we believe, are more frequently viſited wy er or with greater Satisfaction.

Here are two Markets weekly, though only: that on Satur-deys is worthy of Notice. The great Number of Waggons, drawn by ſtately Teams of Horſes, which are ſeen at this Market, muſt needs attract the Obſervation of a Stranger. There are ſaid to be two hundred of theſe of a Day, all laden with Corn for this Market, and which of Courſe, according to their uſual Lading, muſt contain fourteen or fifteen hundred Quarters of Grain. Moſt of this is bought up by the Merchants and their Agents, for foreign Markets, ſo that in the laſt Year" near twenty thouſand Quarters were exported from Cotes only. A great deal, indeed, both of their Barley and Wheat is manufactured amongſt themſelves, and ſent abroad in Flour, Malt, and Biſcuit, for the Navy, Ec. Though in ſome Artieles this Manufacture has greatly diminiſhed of late Years, ſince the Government have cauſed Mills and Ovens to be erected for naval Services.

Here is alſo expoſed: to Sale in this Market, a large and \ pleaſant Sample of the various other Productions of this fertile Spot. Their Poultry and Butter, in particular, are fo plentiful and good, that great Quantities of both are weekly bought

up for the Supply of Portſmouth, &c. and of the latter much is


124 The NATURAL HISTORY is barrelled for the Winter Conſumption, and exported to very diſtant Parts. The rural Inhabitants, which reſort in great Numbers to the Markets for Bufineſs, are of a remarkably ſound and healthful Complexion z and the Fair Sex are deſervedly eſteemed as ſome of the faireſt of their Species, About a Mile to the weſtward of this Town ſtands Cari/brooks Caſtle, which is ſeated upon a very exalted Eminence, overlooking a Village of the ſame Name. This was once a conſiderable Fortreſs, and is ſaid to have been built by VhHitgar, a Favourite of Cerdic, King of the Vg Saxons, to whom he gave the Iſland after having ſubdued it, as before noted. It was afterwards improved by Richard de Rivers, Earl of Devon, in the Reign of Henry I. and repaired by Queen Elizabeth; but it is now fallen into great Decay. Though the Hill upon which the Caſtle ſtands has few to exceed it for Height in the Iſland, yet it is plentifully ſupplied with Water, than which there is none better. It is drawn up from a Well of 72 Yards deep, by the Labour of an Aſs, which runs in a Wheel for that Purpoſe. Upon theſe, and ſome other Accounts, particularly its being famous for the Retention of State Priſoners, (the laſt of which was the unfortunate King Charles I.) this Fortreſs is ſtill viſits ed by Strangers, as a Piece of Antiquity well worth their Notice. | In ſh



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18471211/043/0007
Hampshire Advertiser - Saturday 11 December 1847

History of newport

BY THS AUTHOR OF "SKETCHES OF HAMPSHIRE." No. XXXVII. THE ISLE OF WIGHT. to have been originally founded by subscription, but the following statement will show the Various sources from whence the property now belonging to it was derived. Sir Thomas Fleming, knight, Lord Chier Justice of England, by deed dated 1614, granted to the mayor and burgesses "a place of ground," abutting on Lugley-gtreet, for the benefit of the school then recently founded. By indenture bearing date 1625, Shephen March, in consideration of £16, being part of a sum of £40, given by the will of John Pittis, for ths maintenance of the Free School at Newport, granted to the mayor and burgesses the moiety of a tenement, garden, and orchard adjoining. There is no account to be found of the residue of John Pittis' gift, or of the sum of £50 awarded in 1017, as bas already been stated in the account of the school at Godshill to the mayor and burgesses, but it is supposed by an entry in the Corporation books that they were employed towards the building of the school premises, which now consist of a good house for the schoolmaster, with a spacious school room under the same roof, stable, yard, and garden, containing together about an acre of land, situate at the corner of Lugley-street and St. James's-street, Newport. Sir Richard Worsley, by deed/ dated 1617, gave to the mayor and burgesses a meadow called Grase! Land, containing about an acre of land, for the benefit of the school, which meadow now produces an annual rental of £5." Sir Thomas Fleming and John Earlisraan, esq. of North Stoneham, by deed gave a messuage called the Chantry House, situate in Pyle-street, and the garden adjoining, half an acre of land at Shidefield, in the parish of Carisbrooke, and a messuage and garden on the south side of Lugley-street, all which premises belonged to the dissolved Chantry of Newport, to the Corporation, to hold the same for the benefit of the school, rendering to the Crown Us 6d yearly. These premises are now held under a lease for fifty-one years, granted by the Corporation in 1807, the house and garden in Pyle-street, and the land at Shidefield at £2 15s per annum, though these premises are stated to be worth £30 per annum, if let subject to the landlord's doing the repairs, and the house and garden in Lugley-street at the yearly rent of £1, though believed to be worth £7 per annum. At the renewals of the leases in 1807 a fine of £30 was paid for the former and £13 for the latter. John Serle, by his will dated 1620, gave his messuage in the High-street, to the mayor and burgesses for the support of the schoolmaster, subject to the payment of £1 per annum to his brother, Daniel Serle, and his heirs and successors for ever; and in 1623 the said Danield Serle, in consideration that the mayor and burgesses should, within one year, grant a lease of lhe Suid" premises to his godson, Robert Lee, for three lives at the yearly rent of £40, granted to them the yearly rent of 20s, reserved to him, 10s thereof to be employed yearly for the maintenance of the said Grammar School, and the other 10s to be bestowed according to the discretion of the mayor and burgesses towards the relief of the poor people in the almshouse. The premises consist of a public-house called ihe Currier's Arms, situate in the High-street, held under lease from the Corporation, at the yearly rent of £3, though worth £12, that amount having been paid at the last renewal. These three properties appear to have been leased for long terms of years from the time of their having been originally granted to the school; but at the late investigation it was observed by the Commissioners that this was a disadvantageous mode of leasing the property belonging to the charity, and that it was a proper subject for the consideration of the Corporation, whether it would not be upon Hie whole more advantageous if this establishment were allowed to expire without renewal, although in the intermediate time nothing would be received by the schoolmaster for the time being beyond the small annual reserved rent. It appears from an entry in the minute Corporation book, dated 1619, signed by Sir Thomas Fleming, that he, at the request of the mayor and burgesses, had moved the Earl of Southampton, who was then the Governor of the Isle of Wight, concerning the enclosure of Hunny Hill, for the benefit of the school then newly erected in the borough; and that the Earl was well pleased with the same, and agreed to the enclosing of the land, provided that the sole benefit thereof was intended for the advancement of the means of the school; and it also appears by another entry three months subsequently, that Hunny Hill lands were then let by the Corporation at 4s Id per acre, for the benefit of the school. This estate, which is in the parish of Carisbrooke, but near the town of Newport, consists of five enclosures, containing about thirty acres, and producing at the period ofthe la»e investigation an annual rental of £188. The whole of these rents, subject to deductions for quit, and annuity to almshouse, are paid to the schoolmaster. It appears from a deed dated 1640, in the account of the charities in the parish of Arreton, that Richard Gard gave an annuity of £2 to this school, which was by that deed charged upon a messuage and lands called Bridge House, in the parish of St. Helen's. This annuity is mentioned in a terrier of the property of the Corporation of Newport dated in 1652, but no trace can be found of its ever having been paid. In 1686 certain orders and regulations were made for this school, with lhe approbation of the Bishop of Winchester, whereby, among various directions as to the management of the school, and as to the books in which the boys were to be instructed, it was ordered that there should be chosen and sent to the Free School yearly, so many scholars, poor men's children in the town, as could read and were fit to learn grammar as the mayor and justices of the peace of the borough should think fit, who should be admitted and taught gratis; that there should be settled by the schoolmaster to the usher, as the mayor and justices should think fit, that every year the mayor and justices aud such learned gentlemen and clergymen, and whom also they should think fit to go with them, should, on the Tuesday morning before the breaking up at the school at Easter, meet at the Free School and there examine the proficiency of the scholars, and the state nnd condition of the school; and that they should be entertained by the scholars by orations and declamations, that the school, school-house, and out-houses should be kept by the master in good repair, that the room adjoining the Free School, used as a writing school, should be furnished by the master with forms and desks, and that such p. or scholars as should be sent to the Free School, by the major and justices should be taught to read and cast accounts by the writing master, to be appointed by the mayor and justices at the cost of the master, unless he should choose to teach them writing himself. By articles of agreement made in 1794 between the Corporation and the then master, the latter agreed to instruct in ihe school gratis, all such children of the meaner sort of the inhabitants of the borough, not exceeding in the whole the number of fifteen, as should be sent to the school in notes in writing under the hand of the mayor for the time being. At the period of the late investigation the number of scholars was fifteen, instructed by the master and an usher appointed and paid by him, without any expense, except for their books and stationery, vacancies in their number being supplied by the mayor. The master was allowed to take boarders as well as other day scholars. The boys on the foundation were taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, and those whose parents desired it were instructed in the classics, and at that time there were 6even boys who were thus instructed. The school was annually visited by the Mayor and Corporation, when the scholars were examined and the school premises inspected, and directions given for such repairs as were found necessary. Parish of NEWPORT.-The Free Grammar School is understood Mann's Gift.— John Mann, by will 1688, after giving to trustees a fee farm rent of £46 for the benefit of the parish of Arreton, as has already been stated, gave to the same persons and their heirs a fee farm rent of £53 16s 4d, issuing out of the manor of Overton, in the county of York, to be paid to the mayor and burgesses of the town of Newport, to be by them disposed of, in the first place, in the maintenance, education, and placing out, setting up, or other disposition and preferment in the world, of poor orphans of the said town; and after that, of other poor children there; and after that, for the maintenance and provision of poor, ancient, lame, and impotent people within the town. This fee farm rent amounting, after a deduction of £10 ISs for land-tax, to £43 Is 4d, is paid by the owner of the lands at Overton charged therewith, and is disposed of in the apprenticing of children, preference being given to orphans who have lost both parents, and then to those who have lost one parent, and if there are no orphans the benefit of the charity is extended to other poor children of the borough, a premium of £10 being allowed to each, and 18s for the expense of the indentures. Each year's account is attested by the mayor and allowed and signed by two justices of the peace of the Isle of Wight. The Lower or Worsley Almshouses.— Giles Kent, by his will date not known, devised to Sir Richard Worsley a messuage and grounds adjoining, situate in Crocker-street Newport, to dispose of the same for the comfort and relief of five or more aged and impotent people, requiring nothing at their hands for this benefit but that they should daily serve God and pray for the prosperity of that worshipful family, the Worsleys of Appuldurcombe, whom he had many years served and truly loved, and that the said Sir Richard Worsley should name and appoint all the said poor people as the rooms should become void, to be chosen out of the town and borough of Newport, or in default thereof out of the parish of Godshill; that the said messuage should be called Worsley's Almshouse; and for the better maintaining the same he gave the sum of £100, and also two yearly sums of £8 each during his interest in certain leases for years, towards the repair of the Alms-house and the relief of the poor people therein. By indenture bearing date 1018, Sir Richard Worsley conveyed to the mayor and burgesses the said messuage and ground then used as an almshouse, in which were placed six poor aged women, and also a yearly rent-charge of £10, issuing out of the manors of Chale and Walpin, in lieu of the £100 bequeathed by the testator, in trust to maintain the said almshouse for the relief and harbour of five or more aged and impotent women of the borough of Newport or parish of Godshill, as should be appointed by the mayor and burgesses. This almshouse t silts of six small tenements of one room each, with a garden ided amongst the inhabitants thereof, who are six poor widows of the borough of Newport, who, previous to the passing of the Municipal Act, were appointed by the mayor for the time being, and now by the trustees of the Newport charities. There has always been a sufficient number of poor widows of Newport, who are candidates for this charity, aai no instance is known to have occurred of a widow being ?? from the parish of Godshill. The rent-charge of £10 is received of the agent of Lord Worsley, of which £1 is deducted for repairs, the remaining £9 divided equally among the widows. Christian Roman by her will, date not known, gave a yearly rent-charge of £10 payable out of her messuage and lands at Yafford, in the parish of Shorwell, to such of the six poor widows inhabiting the almshouse as did not receive alms of the town. This amount is paid by the owner of a small farm at Yafford, and is paid to the widows half-yearly in sums of 16s 8d each. The Upper Almshouse.— This almshouse, which is situate at the west-end of the High-street, consists of four tenements of one room each, and are inhabited by poor families, placed there by the church-wardens. Each family receives 2s 6d annually, about Christmas, in respect of the annuity of 10s given by Daniel Serle, stated in the account of the Grammar School. Card's Gift.— The churchwardens, once in two or three years, receive an annual rent-charge of 10s, paid by the owner of the estate called Merry Gardens, at Brading, in respect of Richard Card's benefaction to the parish. This money is distributed in small sums amongst the poor at the discretion of the church-wardens. WarianoVs Gift.— Mary Warland, by her will dated 1736, bequeathed to the churchwardens £40 in trust, for the relief of such poor widows of Newport as should not be already a public charge to the borough. This legacy was laid out In 1754 in the repairs of the church, and from that time £2 yearly has been paid out of the church-rates, and disposed of by the churchwardens, with the interests of the gifts of Bowles and Ruffin. Bowles' Gift. — William Bowles, by will dated 1745, gave to the poor of the parish £100, to be paid to the churchwardens, whom and the minister thereof he directed to place out at interest, and to distribute the same yearly, two days before Christmas, among ten such indigent and labouring families as they should consider to be most in want of it. This legacy was, in 1774, laid out iv the purchase of £100 Isle of Wight House of Industry bond, producing interest at four per cent. Pujlln'* Gift.— Sarah Ruffin, by a codicil of her will dated 1772, gave to the minister and churchwardens of Newport £100, to place out the same at interest, and yearly, on the Ist of January, distribute the same in bread and meat among the poor inhabitants of the town not receiving alms of the parish. This legacy was also laid out in the purchase of an Isle of Wight House of Industry bond, producing interest at four per cent. The interest on these two bonds and the £2 derived from Warland's gift, amounting to £10, were, at the period of the late investigation, distributed in small sums amongst the poor; but the Commissioners stated that the disposal of these charities should be in conformity with the. directions of the respective donors. Poors Zand.— Bv an award of the Commissioners for enclosing the Forest of Parkhurst, in 1815, an allotment of 15a. Sr. 29p. in the extra parochial part of the forest, was made over to the churchwardens and overseers of the poor of Newport as a compensation for the right of the inhabitants of the town of Newport to sere and broken wood, which allotment was, by the same award, exchanged for 10a. Or. 12p. situate at Kitbridge, in the parish of Carisbrook, being part of an allotment made to G. Ward, esq. The Act of Parliament under which this award was made, was passed in 1812, and the Commissioners were thereby required to make compensation either in money or by allotment for the use of the inhabitants of the town of Newport in lieu of the light they might establish to the satisfaction of the Commissioners to sere or broken wood within the limits of the lands to be .enclosed, provided that the same should be invested in the churchwardens and overseers for the time being, to be applied in such manner as might be deemed most beneficial for the poor inhabitants of the said town, except that no part thereof should be employed in aid of any rate made for the relief of the poor. The land, which ! i-able and lies near the town of Newport, was, at the period of tl. ?? investigation, let on lean for the term ct* fourteen mit*; 1 * ° A6d veT annum > «nd it was expected that the rant ce iv^ £ ! ?? f?«l «« »c expiration of the term. The rent is re- EtltZ in Hv ,^ Ung ?? ' ana is « MU »"7 distributed shortly after easier in small sums to poor persons. in 1761* X' y School -- T ** i i ? eh o° l *"*» funded by subscription .nJ*. «! . he oorpote of clothing a number of poor girls of New- and ' QS e^ UCt,nR them in religioD ' Bnd l™ l^"* them to be honest gave for ih^h""^ °, a P? rentice V _ In 17w . Benjamin Cooke, esq. I" be , neflt of Ibis establishment, a messuage aud appurtA habitation iS_rty_S?" , _ and c<""eyed the same to trustees, for the thVSSS ° d ben ? fit of a schoolmistress, as a charity school, for ?? clothing poor girls, .instructing them in reading and workine ,pr.?« nC i P V ° f u the Christiar » religion, and putting them forth to „" ?? sucn schoolmistress and children to be appointed, removed TLnianV^'r, 8 "? S° Te ™ed according to such rules as he, the said h7nH _° £ C °? ke Bhould ° 7 nis **»* ot any instrument under his nana and seal appoint; and it waa further provided, that whenever me number of trustees, resident in the Isle of Wight, should be re- ?? tofive . WI » in Sto act, the survivors should choose and con- Wutl "? P remises to six other persons, resident in the Isle of Wight. tvhZ*** inscription which was raised for the establishment of this ,-ih? ,»j *, S ? ¥eral le B acies a nd donations which have since been con- «\m.m o * u PP°". the sums of £1613 14s, three per cent con- h»i«r.!i K leS ' J and £120 ° tnree P* ?? reduced annuities, »hn,!t PU / Sed ,; A considerable sum, usually amounting to firm* .Zi V an ° uan - T raised "J voluntary subscriptions and dona- ?? made in the chureb » "hen sermons are h Si. * Den / flt 2 f the cnari, y- The ar °°unt of the sums r^V whfJ ° amed . . t0 '5f Barae account as th e dividends of the t«ntv Jw? a r mo, i nt ?? f^P 2d •*' ?? and » itn thi » in <™>e 1« "™J • i educated and clothed, and seven or eight of them i" .w , B ned ** ?? in the schoolmistress's house, and, on f su L g Hn^L a^»! eneraay P - ,aCed out at ?? - The establishment is superintended by a committee of ladies, who are subscribers to it